docs/reference/troubleshooting.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Troubleshooting
parent: Reference
nav_order: 4
---

# Troubleshooting

This guide covers common issues and their solutions when using Drizzle DuckDB.

## JSON Column Errors

### "Postgres JSON/JSONB columns are not supported"

**Symptom**: Runtime error when using `json()` or `jsonb()` from `drizzle-orm/pg-core`.

**Cause**: DuckDB has its own JSON type that works differently from Postgres.

**Solution**: Use `duckDbJson()` instead:

```typescript
// Wrong
import { json, jsonb } from 'drizzle-orm/pg-core';
const table = pgTable('t', { data: json('data') }); // Error!

// Correct
import { duckDbJson } from '@leonardovida-md/drizzle-neo-duckdb';
const table = pgTable('t', { data: duckDbJson('data') });
```

## Array Operator Issues

### Array operators fail with syntax error

**Symptom**: Queries using `@>`, `<@`, or `&&` operators fail.

**Cause**: DuckDB uses different functions for array operations.

**Solution**: Either enable `rewriteArrays` (default) or use explicit helpers:

```typescript
import { duckDbArrayContains } from '@leonardovida-md/drizzle-neo-duckdb';

// Explicit and clear
.where(duckDbArrayContains(products.tags, ['a', 'b']))
```

### Warning about Postgres-style array literals

**Symptom**: Console warnings about `'{1,2,3}'` style array literals.

**Cause**: Postgres array literal syntax isn't supported in DuckDB.

**Solution**: Use native JavaScript arrays or DuckDB list syntax:

```typescript
// Wrong
await db.execute(sql`SELECT * FROM t WHERE tags = '{a,b,c}'`);

// Correct
await db.execute(sql`SELECT * FROM t WHERE tags = ['a', 'b', 'c']`);
```

To make this a hard error instead of a warning:

```typescript
const db = drizzle(connection, {
  rejectStringArrayLiterals: true,
});
```

## Transaction Issues

### Nested transaction rollback aborts entire transaction

**Symptom**: Rolling back an inner transaction also rolls back the outer transaction.

**Cause**: DuckDB doesn't support `SAVEPOINT`, so nested transactions reuse the outer transaction.

**Solution**: Structure code to avoid nested transactions:

```typescript
// Problematic pattern
await db.transaction(async (tx) => {
  await tx.insert(users).values({ name: 'Alice' });
  await tx.transaction(async (innerTx) => {
    await innerTx.insert(users).values({ name: 'Bob' });
    innerTx.rollback(); // Aborts EVERYTHING
  });
});

// Better: handle rollback logic at outer level
await db.transaction(async (tx) => {
  await tx.insert(users).values({ name: 'Alice' });
  try {
    await tx.insert(users).values({ name: 'Bob' });
  } catch (e) {
    // Handle error without rolling back Alice
  }
});
```

## Next.js Issues

### "Module parse failed" Error

**Symptom**:

```
Module parse failed: Unexpected character '...'
```

**Cause**: Webpack trying to parse native Node.js modules.

**Solution**: Add to `next.config.js`:

```javascript
// Next.js 15+
const nextConfig = {
  serverExternalPackages: ['@duckdb/node-api'],
};

// Next.js 14
const nextConfig = {
  experimental: {
    serverComponentsExternalPackages: ['@duckdb/node-api'],
  },
};
```

### "Native Node.js APIs not supported" Error

**Symptom**:

```
Native Node.js APIs are not supported in Edge Runtime
```

**Cause**: Trying to use DuckDB in an Edge function.

**Solution**: Ensure your route uses Node.js runtime:

```typescript
// app/api/data/route.ts
export const runtime = 'nodejs';
```

### GLIBCXX Errors on Vercel

**Symptom**:

```
Error: /lib64/libstdc++.so.6: version `GLIBCXX_3.4.26' not found
```

**Cause**: Vercel region doesn't have compatible C++ runtime.

**Solutions**:

- Deploy to a different Vercel region
- Use Docker-based deployment
- Consider using MotherDuck instead of local DuckDB

### Connection Not Cleaned Up in Serverless

**Symptom**: Memory leaks or stale connections in serverless functions.

**Solution**: Use a cleanup pattern:

```typescript
export async function withDb<T>(
  callback: (db: DuckDBDatabase) => Promise<T>
): Promise<T> {
  const instance = await DuckDBInstance.create(':memory:');
  const connection = await instance.connect();
  try {
    return await callback(drizzle(connection));
  } finally {
    connection.closeSync();
    instance.closeSync();
  }
}
```

## Migration Issues

### "Migration already applied" Errors

**Symptom**: Migrations fail saying they're already applied, but database doesn't have expected schema.

**Cause**: Migration tracking table has records but tables were dropped.

**Solution**: Clear the tracking table:

```typescript
import { sql } from 'drizzle-orm';

await db.execute(sql`DELETE FROM drizzle.__drizzle_migrations`);
await migrate(db, './drizzle');
```

### Sequence Errors

**Symptom**: Errors about missing sequences during migration.

**Solution**: Manually create the required sequence:

```typescript
await db.execute(sql`
  CREATE SEQUENCE IF NOT EXISTS drizzle.__drizzle_migrations_id_seq
`);
```

### Schema Doesn't Exist

**Symptom**: Migration fails because schema doesn't exist.

**Solution**: Create the schema first:

```typescript
await db.execute(sql`CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS drizzle`);
await migrate(db, './drizzle');
```

### Postgres Syntax Not Compatible

**Symptom**: Drizzle Kit generated SQL fails in DuckDB.

**Common incompatibilities**:

- `SERIAL` type doesn't exist
- `JSONB` should be `JSON`
- Some constraint syntax differs

**Solution**: Review and adjust generated SQL:

```sql
-- Generated (Postgres)
CREATE TABLE users (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  data JSONB
);

-- Fixed (DuckDB)
CREATE SEQUENCE IF NOT EXISTS users_id_seq;
CREATE TABLE users (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY DEFAULT nextval('users_id_seq'),
  data JSON
);
```

## MotherDuck Issues

### Connection Timeout

**Symptom**: Connection to MotherDuck hangs or times out.

**Solutions**:

- Verify your `MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN` is valid
- Check network connectivity
- Ensure you're not behind a restrictive firewall

### Token Not Found

**Symptom**: Authentication errors when connecting to MotherDuck.

**Solution**: Ensure environment variable is set:

```typescript
const token = process.env.MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN;
if (!token) {
  throw new Error('MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN environment variable is required');
}

const instance = await DuckDBInstance.create('md:', {
  motherduck_token: token,
});
```

## Type Inference Issues

### Types Not Inferred Correctly

**Symptom**: TypeScript shows wrong types for query results.

**Solution**: Ensure you're passing schema to drizzle:

```typescript
import * as schema from './schema';

const db = drizzle(connection, { schema });

// Now relational queries have correct types
const users = await db.query.users.findMany();
```

### DuckDB-specific Types Show as `unknown`

**Symptom**: Columns with `duckDbList`, `duckDbStruct`, etc. show as `unknown`.

**Solution**: Provide generic type parameter:

```typescript
const table = pgTable('example', {
  tags: duckDbList<string>('tags', 'TEXT'),
  metadata: duckDbStruct<{ name: string; value: number }>('metadata', {
    name: 'TEXT',
    value: 'INTEGER',
  }),
});
```

## Performance Issues

### Slow Queries on Large Datasets

**Symptom**: Queries take longer than expected.

**Solutions**:

1. Use appropriate indexes
2. Add `LIMIT` clauses for large result sets
3. Consider using CTEs for complex queries
4. Profile with `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`

```typescript
// Profile a query
const explain = await db.execute(sql`
  EXPLAIN ANALYZE
  SELECT * FROM large_table WHERE category = 'electronics'
`);
console.log(explain);
```

### Memory Usage Too High

**Symptom**: Application runs out of memory.

**Cause**: Results are fully materialized in memory.

**Solution**: Use pagination:

```typescript
const pageSize = 1000;
let offset = 0;
let hasMore = true;

while (hasMore) {
  const batch = await db
    .select()
    .from(largeTable)
    .limit(pageSize)
    .offset(offset);

  // Process batch
  processBatch(batch);

  hasMore = batch.length === pageSize;
  offset += pageSize;
}
```

## See Also

- [Limitations]({{ '/reference/limitations' | relative_url }}) - Known limitations
- [FAQ]({{ '/reference/faq' | relative_url }}) - Frequently asked questions
- [Configuration]({{ '/reference/configuration' | relative_url }}) - All configuration options

Commit message:

feat: Keep pooled transactions on one connection and add client-safe helper exports (#19)
Added:
- helper-only entrypoint and defaulted introspection imports to it
- split wrapper core to avoid bundling native bindings
- pinned pooled transactions to a single connection for atomicity
- refreshed docs/tests

docs/reference/troubleshooting.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Troubleshooting
parent: Reference
nav_order: 4
---

# Troubleshooting

This guide covers common issues and their solutions when using Drizzle DuckDB.

## JSON Column Errors

### "Postgres JSON/JSONB columns are not supported"

**Symptom**: Runtime error when using `json()` or `jsonb()` from `drizzle-orm/pg-core`.

**Cause**: DuckDB has its own JSON type that works differently from Postgres.

**Solution**: Use `duckDbJson()` instead:

```typescript
// Wrong
import { json, jsonb } from 'drizzle-orm/pg-core';
const table = pgTable('t', { data: json('data') }); // Error!

// Correct
import { duckDbJson } from '@leonardovida-md/drizzle-neo-duckdb';
const table = pgTable('t', { data: duckDbJson('data') });
```

## Array Operator Issues

### Array operators fail with syntax error

**Symptom**: Queries using `@>`, `<@`, or `&&` operators fail.

**Cause**: DuckDB uses different functions for array operations.

**Solution**: Either enable `rewriteArrays` (default) or use explicit helpers:

```typescript
import { duckDbArrayContains } from '@leonardovida-md/drizzle-neo-duckdb';

// Explicit and clear
.where(duckDbArrayContains(products.tags, ['a', 'b']))
```

### Warning about Postgres-style array literals

**Symptom**: Console warnings about `'{1,2,3}'` style array literals.

**Cause**: Postgres array literal syntax isn't supported in DuckDB.

**Solution**: Use native JavaScript arrays or DuckDB list syntax:

```typescript
// Wrong
await db.execute(sql`SELECT * FROM t WHERE tags = '{a,b,c}'`);

// Correct
await db.execute(sql`SELECT * FROM t WHERE tags = ['a', 'b', 'c']`);
```

To make this a hard error instead of a warning:

```typescript
const db = drizzle(connection, {
  rejectStringArrayLiterals: true,
});
```

## Transaction Issues

### Nested transaction rollback aborts entire transaction

**Symptom**: Rolling back an inner transaction also rolls back the outer transaction.

**Cause**: DuckDB doesn't support `SAVEPOINT`, so nested transactions reuse the outer transaction.

**Solution**: Structure code to avoid nested transactions:

```typescript
// Problematic pattern
await db.transaction(async (tx) => {
  await tx.insert(users).values({ name: 'Alice' });
  await tx.transaction(async (innerTx) => {
    await innerTx.insert(users).values({ name: 'Bob' });
    innerTx.rollback(); // Aborts EVERYTHING
  });
});

// Better: handle rollback logic at outer level
await db.transaction(async (tx) => {
  await tx.insert(users).values({ name: 'Alice' });
  try {
    await tx.insert(users).values({ name: 'Bob' });
  } catch (e) {
    // Handle error without rolling back Alice
  }
});
```

## Next.js Issues

### "Module parse failed" Error

**Symptom**:

```
Module parse failed: Unexpected character '...'
```

**Cause**: Webpack trying to parse native Node.js modules.

**Solution**: Add to `next.config.js`:

```javascript
// Next.js 15+
const nextConfig = {
  serverExternalPackages: ['@duckdb/node-api'],
};

// Next.js 14
const nextConfig = {
  experimental: {
    serverComponentsExternalPackages: ['@duckdb/node-api'],
  },
};
```

When sharing generated schemas with client components (e.g., drizzle-zod or tRPC inputs), import column helpers from the browser-safe subpath to avoid bundling the native binding:

```ts
import { duckDbJson } from '@leonardovida-md/drizzle-neo-duckdb/helpers';
```

### "Native Node.js APIs not supported" Error

**Symptom**:

```
Native Node.js APIs are not supported in Edge Runtime
```

**Cause**: Trying to use DuckDB in an Edge function.

**Solution**: Ensure your route uses Node.js runtime:

```typescript
// app/api/data/route.ts
export const runtime = 'nodejs';
```

### GLIBCXX Errors on Vercel

**Symptom**:

```
Error: /lib64/libstdc++.so.6: version `GLIBCXX_3.4.26' not found
```

**Cause**: Vercel region doesn't have compatible C++ runtime.

**Solutions**:

- Deploy to a different Vercel region
- Use Docker-based deployment
- Consider using MotherDuck instead of local DuckDB

### Connection Not Cleaned Up in Serverless

**Symptom**: Memory leaks or stale connections in serverless functions.

**Solution**: Use a cleanup pattern:

```typescript
export async function withDb<T>(
  callback: (db: DuckDBDatabase) => Promise<T>
): Promise<T> {
  const instance = await DuckDBInstance.create(':memory:');
  const connection = await instance.connect();
  try {
    return await callback(drizzle(connection));
  } finally {
    connection.closeSync();
    instance.closeSync();
  }
}
```

## Migration Issues

### "Migration already applied" Errors

**Symptom**: Migrations fail saying they're already applied, but database doesn't have expected schema.

**Cause**: Migration tracking table has records but tables were dropped.

**Solution**: Clear the tracking table:

```typescript
import { sql } from 'drizzle-orm';

await db.execute(sql`DELETE FROM drizzle.__drizzle_migrations`);
await migrate(db, './drizzle');
```

### Sequence Errors

**Symptom**: Errors about missing sequences during migration.

**Solution**: Manually create the required sequence:

```typescript
await db.execute(sql`
  CREATE SEQUENCE IF NOT EXISTS drizzle.__drizzle_migrations_id_seq
`);
```

### Schema Doesn't Exist

**Symptom**: Migration fails because schema doesn't exist.

**Solution**: Create the schema first:

```typescript
await db.execute(sql`CREATE SCHEMA IF NOT EXISTS drizzle`);
await migrate(db, './drizzle');
```

### Postgres Syntax Not Compatible

**Symptom**: Drizzle Kit generated SQL fails in DuckDB.

**Common incompatibilities**:

- `SERIAL` type doesn't exist
- `JSONB` should be `JSON`
- Some constraint syntax differs

**Solution**: Review and adjust generated SQL:

```sql
-- Generated (Postgres)
CREATE TABLE users (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  data JSONB
);

-- Fixed (DuckDB)
CREATE SEQUENCE IF NOT EXISTS users_id_seq;
CREATE TABLE users (
  id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY DEFAULT nextval('users_id_seq'),
  data JSON
);
```

## MotherDuck Issues

### Connection Timeout

**Symptom**: Connection to MotherDuck hangs or times out.

**Solutions**:

- Verify your `MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN` is valid
- Check network connectivity
- Ensure you're not behind a restrictive firewall

### Token Not Found

**Symptom**: Authentication errors when connecting to MotherDuck.

**Solution**: Ensure environment variable is set:

```typescript
const token = process.env.MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN;
if (!token) {
  throw new Error('MOTHERDUCK_TOKEN environment variable is required');
}

const instance = await DuckDBInstance.create('md:', {
  motherduck_token: token,
});
```

## Type Inference Issues

### Types Not Inferred Correctly

**Symptom**: TypeScript shows wrong types for query results.

**Solution**: Ensure you're passing schema to drizzle:

```typescript
import * as schema from './schema';

const db = drizzle(connection, { schema });

// Now relational queries have correct types
const users = await db.query.users.findMany();
```

### DuckDB-specific Types Show as `unknown`

**Symptom**: Columns with `duckDbList`, `duckDbStruct`, etc. show as `unknown`.

**Solution**: Provide generic type parameter:

```typescript
const table = pgTable('example', {
  tags: duckDbList<string>('tags', 'TEXT'),
  metadata: duckDbStruct<{ name: string; value: number }>('metadata', {
    name: 'TEXT',
    value: 'INTEGER',
  }),
});
```

## Performance Issues

### Slow Queries on Large Datasets

**Symptom**: Queries take longer than expected.

**Solutions**:

1. Use appropriate indexes
2. Add `LIMIT` clauses for large result sets
3. Consider using CTEs for complex queries
4. Profile with `EXPLAIN ANALYZE`

```typescript
// Profile a query
const explain = await db.execute(sql`
  EXPLAIN ANALYZE
  SELECT * FROM large_table WHERE category = 'electronics'
`);
console.log(explain);
```

### Memory Usage Too High

**Symptom**: Application runs out of memory.

**Cause**: Results are fully materialized in memory.

**Solution**: Use pagination:

```typescript
const pageSize = 1000;
let offset = 0;
let hasMore = true;

while (hasMore) {
  const batch = await db
    .select()
    .from(largeTable)
    .limit(pageSize)
    .offset(offset);

  // Process batch
  processBatch(batch);

  hasMore = batch.length === pageSize;
  offset += pageSize;
}
```

## See Also

- [Limitations]({{ '/reference/limitations' | relative_url }}) - Known limitations
- [FAQ]({{ '/reference/faq' | relative_url }}) - Frequently asked questions
- [Configuration]({{ '/reference/configuration' | relative_url }}) - All configuration options
